This animation explains requirements in
the ADA and ABA Standards
for sales and counters, check-out aisles,
and food service lines.
The standards apply to all types of counters
where purchases and other transactions
are made and services are provided.
Examples include:
sales counters of all types
reception and concierge counters
information counters
registration and check-in counters
counters at bank teller windows and ticket windows
customer service counters
ordering, pick-up and drop-off counters
and other types of service or sales counters
Display or exhibit counters are covered
only if they also function as a sales or service counter.
Access is required to at least
one of each type of counter provided.
If one continuous counter serves
multiple functions at different sections,
access is required to each type of function.
Where counters are dispersed throughout a facility,
accessible counters must be dispersed as well.
The surface of accessible counters is limited
to a height of 36 inches.
The accessible surface must be integral to
the counter and extend the full depth of
the counter top for customer use.
Folding or pull-out shelves cannot
substitute for accessible counter surfaces
in new construction or alterations.
Because of the relatively brief nature of
most sales or service transactions,
the standards permit access for
either a forward approach or a parallel approach.
Forward approach access provides
knee and toe space below the counter so that
people using wheelchairs can roll beneath.
Clear floor space at least 48 inches deep
must extend from 17 to 25 inches
below the counter.
Both the accessible counter and
the clear floor space are required to be
at least 30 inches wide.
Other sections of the counter
can be higher than 36 inches.
Knee space 27 inches high minimum
must extend at least 8 inches
from the leading edge of the counter.
Beyond this depth, the clearance can reduce
to 9 inches over a 3-inch span.
Toe space at least 9 inches high extends 6 inches.
No protrusions or obstructions are permitted
within the knee and toe space or
the rest of the clear floor space.
If the clear floor space is confined on three sides
and located in a recess more than 2 feet deep,
then it must be at least 36 inches wide
instead of 30 inches to allow more
room for maneuvering.
For a parallel approach, the accessible portion
of counter surface must be at least 36 inches long.
If a counter is not this long,
it does not have to be lengthened to 36 inches
but must be accessible for its full length.
The 30-inch by 48-inch clear floor space
must be parallel to the counter
and abut the counter's leading edge.
Shelves, displays, and other elements
cannot obstruct the clear floor space
or offset it from the leading edge of the counter.
If the clear floor space is confined on three sides
and recessed more than 15 inches,
the length must be at least 60 inches
instead of 48 inches to ease maneuvering into it.
The open side must remain unobstructed.
It is important that accessible portions of counters
be kept clear of merchandise, displays,
and other objects.
Accessible surfaces can be integrated
with higher sections for standees in the same counter.
This check-in counter provides
an accessible surface with forward approach access
between two higher sections of counter.
The accessible section of counter
must be as deep or deeper than the higher sections.
This accessible counter is long enough
and has sufficient clear floor space
to also accommodate parallel approaches
which is helpful for people
who use scooters and other devices with front tillers.
These requirements also apply to counters
at teller windows, ticket windows, and service windows.
While the counter height is limited to 36 inches,
the standards do not specify the height
of service windows.
A maximum height of 43 inches
measured to the bottom of the window,
as required for vision lights at doors,
is advisable to provide adequate sight lines.
If security glazing is provided at a counter,
a means of facilitating voice communication is required.
Acceptable methods include grilles, slats,
talk-through baffles, handsets and intercoms.
Grilles or baffles at accessible counters
should be at heights that are convenient to
use from a seated position,
but their location is not specified in the standards.
Buttons and other controls for intercoms
and similar devices, where provided,
must comply as operable parts and be located
within accessible reach range.
If a telephone handset is provided,
it must have compliant volume control.
Counters surfaces that project into circulation paths
from walls can be hazardous to people
with vision impairments if their leading edge
is above 27 inches and outside of cane sweep.
Those that protrude no more than 4 inches
into a circulation path,
such as a counter at a service window,
do not require further treatment.
Otherwise, counters can be recessed in an alcove
or they can be partially enclosed
so that they are detectable
within the 27 inch high maximum cane sweep.
The leading edge of the counter cannot project
more than 4 inches from the detectable portion
that is within cane sweep.
Side panels provide a solution that accommodates
access for a forward approach.
Waiting lines that serve accessible counters
or check-out aisles, where provided,
must meet requirements for accessible routes.
This applies to waiting lines defined by fixed posts,
stanchions, partitions or other elements,
but the standards also can be used to ensure access
to waiting lines with movable elements.
Accessible routes must have a
continuous clear width of 36 inches.
The clear width can be reduced to 32 inches
at points for a distance not exceeding 2 feet.
Segments with a clear width below 36 inches
must be separated by at least 4 feet.
180-degree turns around obstructions require
additional clear width to facilitate maneuvering.
One option is to provide a clear width of
60 inches at the turn.
Alternatively, the width at the turn can be
48 inches minimum if both connecting routes
are at least 42 inches wide.
Stanchions and other elements cannot reduce
the minimum clear width at turns.
Turns around obstructions that are at least 4 feet long
do not require a clear width greater than 36 inches.
The standards also cover access to check-out aisles.
A table specifies the number of check-out aisles
for each function that must be accessible.
As with counters, accessible check-out aisles
must be dispersed throughout a facility where
check-out aisles are dispersed.
The International Symbol of Accessibility
or ISA is required to label accessible check-out aisles
unless all check-out aisles are accessible.
If signs are provided to identify check-out aisles
by number, letter, or function, the ISA
must be provided in the same location.
Check-out aisles must meet all applicable
requirements for accessible routes.
It is important that shelves, displays,
and other elements not reduce
the minimum clear width.
The counter surface height cannot exceed 38 inches,
and edge protection on the aisle side
is limited to a height of 2 inches.
If check writing surfaces are provided,
they must be located within a height of
28 to 34 inches above the floor.
Those that easily pull out or pivot can facilitate access.
Operable parts of point of sale terminals,
card readers, and similar devices must comply
and be located within accessible reach ranges.
Devices that are easy to adjust and tilt
will facilitate use and can improve
the visibility of displays and buttons.
A height for visibility is not specified for these devices,
but the standard eye level range of a person
using a wheelchair is approximately 43 to 51 inches.
In addition to counters and check-out aisles,
the standards also cover food service lines.
In this example of a restaurant with
take-out or eat-in options,
customers queue at a station to place orders.
This is one type of service counter in the facility
that must be accessible and provide
access for a parallel approach,
as seen here,
or a forward approach.
The waiting line must comply as an accessible route.
Where the meal preparation area is intended
to be visible to customers,
it should be equally visible to patrons with disabilities
although this is not addressed by the standards.
If tray slides are provided,
they must be at a height of 28 to 34 inches
above the floor measured to the top.
A separate counter that is provided for picking up orders
represents another type of counter
that must be accessible.
The counter shown here
provides forward approach access,
but there also is sufficient space for a parallel approach.
If self-service shelves are provided,
at least 50%, but no fewer than one,
of each type must be within accessible reach range.
For unobstructed reaches,
the range is 15 inches minimum
to 48 inches maximum in height.
Access is also required to the separate payment counter
which represents another type of counter.
Operable parts of soda fountains
and other food and beverage dispensers that are fixed
must be usable with one hand and not require
tight grasping, pinching, twisting of the wrist,
or more than 5 pounds force to operate.
They also must be located
within accessible reach range.
For a side reach, the 48-inch maximum height
is permitted to a reach depth up to 10 inches
measured form the clear floor space.
If the reach depth exceeds 10 inches,
the high side reach is reduced to 46 inches maximum.
The side reach depth cannot exceed 24 inches.
For forward reaches, the 48-inch maximum applies
to reach depths up to 20 inches measured to
the leading edge of a counter or other obstruction.
If the reach depth is greater than 20 inches
up
to the maximum 25-inch depth permitted,
the maximum reach is limited to 44 inches.
Knee and toe space beneath obstructions
must extend to or beyond the reach depth.
Fixed devices that dispense condiments,
tableware, and dinnerware,
also must comply and be located
within accessible reach range.
Further guidance on sales and service counters,
check-out aisles, and food service lines
and other requirements in the ADA and ABA Standards
is available from the U.S. Access Board.
This animation was developed
by the U.S. Access Board in cooperation
with the Federal agencies that issue
the ADA and ABA Standards.